My
name
is Larry Probst. I am a retired president of Betz
Processed Chemicals here in the Woodlands. I
think one of the things that you are trying to
determine is how Betz and the probes family
specifically got here to the woodlands let me back
up just a little bit on my own personal history i was
a 1950 graduate of villanova university as a
chemical engineer and in june of 1950 i had a
extremely interesting two weeks the 3rd of june my
first son was born the 7th was my first wedding
anniversary. The fifth, I graduated from
Villanova. And the 12th, I went to work for Betts
Laboratories.
Since that time, I've had several
responsibilities at Betts, moving through the
engineering chairs to eventually become vice
president of their engineering force. And I also
became a director in 1975 But in the latter part of
1977, Betts, which is a worldwide water and oil
treating company, made the decision that they
would have to move some of their analytical and
research facilities from the Tribos area, which
is a suburb just north of the city of Philadelphia,
and we chose to go somewhere in the south and since
houston was the epicenter as we say of our business
in this particular area it seemed quite natural to
begin to look for space in this houston area
i happen to be personally familiar with the
woodlands having come here as an officer of bets
and the head of some of the units where we wanted to
have regional meetings in this particular
section. And prior to coming to the Woodlands, we
had been to places like April Sound and some others
that I don't really recall right now in this area.
So when the Woodlands finally opened up their
conference center, we came very early in the game
in the 76 77 period so when we decided in the
november of 1977 to move south it was easy for me to
think of the woodlands as a good place to locate my
family
one of the reasons why i felt comfortable in the
woodlands bringing my wife and 16-year-old
daughter was the fact that my son, Thomas, already
lived here. He was a contract painter working for
some of our original builders here, such as Tom Cox
and Jim O'Connor, and some of the others that may
not necessarily still be building here. But
anyhow, Tom and his wife, Sue, had moved here in the
latter 76.
So knowing that I would have to do a good bit of
traveling and not wanting my wife and daughter to
feel too alone, I thought that the Woodlands would
be an excellent place for them to be living with the
closeness of Tom and his family.
After we decided where we would locate, We then
began to look around the Houston area for a
suitable spot of 15 or 20 acres of land. And we
realized that in order to have a campus-like
atmosphere, similar to the ones we had in the
Philadelphia area, we couldn't locate in areas
like Rankin Road or off of 45 or off of 59. So we
shopped. and finally settled on the two places
where we could locate Kingwood and the Woodlands.
One of the things you mentioned earlier, which I
thought might be significant, is the issue of the
covenant. That's what I was getting to. The
Kingwood area and the Woodlands area both gave us
easy access to the international airport. And
since I personally had already decided and made
commitments to build a house, I was leaning
towards the woodlands. But one of the other
executives of bets was responsible for picking
the location. And coincidentally, he ended up
coming here with one of the early
real estate persons, and I can't recall his name
right offhand.
But after he looked the two places over, he felt
that the Woodlands was a better location and
proceeded to spend about a half an hour on the
telephone convincing me halfway across the
country that this was a good spot. We both realized
that the restrictive covenants that the
Woodlands had was one of the main features for our
laboratory and research and headquarters for the
Betz Process Chemical Company.
I think those features are probably the main
reasons why we located here in addition to the
general quality of this area as compared to living
in the champions area or naturally any of us that
wanted to be part of the vets campus and our homes if
we could do them in the same area why It would be far
better for us than doing like we just did in
Philadelphia, drive 15 to 20 miles every day to
work. You actually discussed that on the phone
then, the advantages of being able to live in the
area where you were working. Well, that was one of
the main things that we used to sell the other
people that we were bringing from other parts of
the country. We brought research and laboratory
people from Philadelphia, but we brought
salesmen, managers, and other high-tech people
from other parts of the United States, such as
California, Chicago area, some in the central
Midwest, in St. Louis, Denver. There were perhaps
25 people that were the original cadre of the vets
group here.
we made arrangements with the woodlands and
bought 20 acres in the location that we are now and
after we did that we of course cleared the land and
built our first 40 000 square foot building in the
shape of a t with the top half of the t the
headquarters for That's Process Chemical
Company, and then the bottom half were the
Analytical Laboratory and the research.
Subsequent to that, we built about another 55,000
square feet of research space as we expanded about
two years after opening there in 1980.
recommended to people as they were considered to
transfer from Philadelphia to the woodlands
operation. It was relatively easy to convince
them to
come to the south in addition to the good climate
compared to all the snow digging that we had to do.
wonderful area of the woodlands and the new
hometown program and everything else the growth
pattern the hike and bike trails i often say that
coming here at 52 i regret i didn't come here at the
age of 32 and raise my family here rather than
having most all of them out of high school by the
time i got here because all of the younger
generation of feds that has come here used to
always go back to Philadelphia and tell the people
back there that it was like a constant vacation
while they lived in the woodlands with all of the
programs that we had here for the children, with
the swimming pools and the facilities that we had.
And of course, when we came here, there were only
3,000 people and no red lights. Now we have about
30,000 and a lot of red lights. We only had the
original village of Grogan's Mill at the time, and
only the two golf courses, but a lot of tennis
courts and a lot of opportunities for
all ages of people.
That's fine. One of the things, has Betts been in a
growth mode since you came? Have new staff members
or researchers come since then? Has that initial
sense of enamor with the woodlands maintained
itself through? I would say so, yes, because we've
had people come here almost on a continuous basis
for the first seven or eight years, from 1978 until
about the past two years. where we would bring
different units of best research, maybe just four
or five people. And then another year would pass,
and we'd bring four or five more and maybe hire
some. Most of the technicians are hired locally.
Most of the research managers have transferred
from Philadelphia or from some other part of the
country. But I know that when they were hiring
people to come here,
to identify and show them all the advantages that
we had here at the Woodlands helped a lot of people
to make up their mind to move from other parts that
were not quite as enjoyable to live and work. One
thing in the very early stages, we all talked about
having the University of Houston campus here. And
that brought a few people. to this area to help
increase their education. And that did not
develop into an active program. They since have
gone to some of the other local schools in order to
get their extra degrees.
How active was the Woodmans itself? in helping you
as a director locate these people here? Did they
play a role, a significant role? Were they
supportive? I would say that not only the
Woodlands people, but also some of the other
Houston area groups that helped people transfer
from other parts of the country to this particular
area. There were a lot of real estate and
development people that had units. I think one of
them at the time was called the Woodlands
Development Council or something like that. I
really don't remember. But there were several
different people that I remember helped us. One of
the original men that's still here is a chap by the
name of Rex Johnson, who was primarily
responsible for us finally deciding on where we
located and the exact acreage that we picked,
because we had two or three choices. None of this
area north of Timberlock was developed at that
time. So we had to literally build the roads to get
to our location. So it was a little difficult to
visualize what it was going to be like. And of
course, with other people like Richard Brown
Ed Lee, who was the original president.
Those are just some of the few people that I can
remember at the beginning.
Let
me just say one more thing about our family.
indicate how totally convenient it is to live in
the woodlands in my opinion we had of course as i
said earlier our son thomas lived here before we
came and when my wife and my daughter gina came down
in 78 then within two years after that my son
michael joined us and stayed with us for about a
year and then married and now he lives here so i have
one of the A few people with three generations, two
sons and three grandchildren. This really is a
hometown. And this is obvious. And when people ask
me if I were going back to Philadelphia when I
retired this year from Betts after 40-plus years,
having passed the retirement age of 65, I was
asked, oh, I'm sure you and your wife will return to
Philly. And the answer was no. very simply, no,
there's no reason that we should ever consider
going back to Philly because we have our two sons
and three grandchildren here, and we have our
daughter and her husband living in Austin after
she subsequently went to University of Texas and
graduated from there. So they're living in
Austin, and now they're expecting a baby, so the
remaining, our oldest boy and his two children and
his wife live in San Francisco area in Black Hawk,
south of Walnut Creek. And we just came back from
there. And since my wife and I do travel a lot, we had
no problem going out to California. I returned to
Philadelphia about every month or nine or 10 times
a year for our vets board meetings. So I'll
continue to do that until April of 92.
And to then talk about the pavilion, one of the
other responsibilities that I had here or one of
the avocations early was a member of the board of
directors of the original bank in the Woodlands,
which eventually became M Bank of Woodlands. And
it's now Bank One, but when the Bank One people took
over MBank, well, they dissolved all of the
boards, so you no longer have a board. But I think
the opportunity to work in the community, and of
course I also am the head of the Finance Committee
of St. Simon and Jude Catholic Church. It seems to
me that some of the older and earlier people here
were assigned some of the... responsibilities
from the different organizations and churches,
so I'm sure that's why I ended up doing some of the
other than vets business. And I'm also a member of
the Houston Golf Association, so I've got many
things to keep me busy in my retirement. And one of
the opportunities I was given towards the end of
well, I should say in the early part of 1990, was the
opportunity to be on the board of the Pavilion,
Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion for the
Performing Arts. Some people have indicated that
I got the job because the Betz parking lot was right
near the pavilion, but I don't like to think that
was the whole reason. But having known the
Mitchells as well as the other people in the
hierarchy of the Mitchell organization. I'm sure
that my name was one of the ones on the list of
candidates for the board members. And that gave me
an opportunity to, again, have something else to
work with during my retirement. I think that the
pavilion is probably going to be one of the nicest
units of the woodlands. We've only completed one
year, but we have a lot of plans for 1991 to increase
the number of programs. And I'm sure that the
opportunity to provide more cultural
involvements for the people in the Woodlands will
make this hometown a bigger and even better
hometown. Do you have a sense of how many people
from the Woodlands have attended
program versus how many from surrounding
communities? No, they've taken surveys of the
people that have come to the programs but i think
it's very difficult i know from talking to many of
my friends in the
woodlands that all of the industries have sent
people from their
companies as part of perks for their own employees
for example at vets we had a box and also we had four
reserve seats And if we did not have customers that
were able to come and join up with us at any of the
performances, why, we would then turn the tickets
over to our employees and their families so that
Was that a bed suggestion or did that come from
folks in the woodlands? No, that was our own
decision. But other companies are doing the same
thing? But we know that other companies have been
doing the same thing, especially those people
that are in adjacent boxes to us. We've noticed
that they've been sending their employees as well
as their own customers. And I know from talking to
the younger generation, you know, my son's
associates, both my boys have different groups
that they associate with in their sporting
events, you know, the tennis and golf and softball
and, of course, all of the younger generation with
the soccer teams and the independent football and
baseball, little league, all of those fathers
that are one generation away from me, they all have
these opportunities in the Woodlands to be
involved in all these athletic events. And now I
even have some of my grandchildren getting
involved in those. But getting back to the
pavilion, I know that there are a lot of people that
have sent the younger folks to the pavilion. A lot
of them have gone on their own to the various
performances that we've had. Because my
generation doesn't really know all of those
performances. But my son's generation knew them
all by heart, and they were always participating
in the shows. What has been the philosophical or
the values that the board has utilized or seen
demonstrated in the Pavilion? To what audience is
it aiming its venue of acts? Well, I think that one
of the things that we're trying to do right now is to
focus more on the type of programs that we're going
to have. Thirty, for example, in number for what I
call the non-performing arts or the
musical units, such as Crosby, Stills, and Nash,
you know, those, however you define those,
whether it's rock or concert or whatever, and then
we're going to have twenty or more of the cultural
things such as the ballet and the symphony and
that type. So I would say that we're trying to focus
on every generation and every type of cultural
program that most anybody would be interested in.
So is it abroad? You're trying to get all
generations. Obviously you can get the older
people with some of the pop arts. Last year when you
had Frank Sinatra and some of those older people.
The Woodlands does not have a high percentage of
over 50. Because every company that came here had
maybe a manager over 50 and then several 40 year
olds. So we don't have a standard town of age
brackets because we are almost in a pyramid form
with a few olders and then a few more in the 40s and a
lot more in the 30s and a tremendous number in the
20s so the people that move here with companies
normally came in in that type of as i call it pyramid
form but there have been a number of people that
have moved here for retirement that I'm familiar
with from my older golf partners. They had 40 or
50-year-old children here that came as part of a
company. So then when they came here and visited,
they found what a nice place it was to locate. And if
you can get through July and August in the summer,
most Yankees can stand the South. And so I know
quite a few people that have retired here. Paul
Womack said he doesn't even go on vacations
anymore. He can't think of any place he wants to go.
Everything that he wants to do is right here. While
that may be a little bit extreme, I think it's
illustrative of what you're saying. It's a
pleasant place for people. Well, we used to laugh
about people who came down here of our original
group back in 78. when they would go back to
Philadelphia to visit their relatives at
Christmas time or weddings or whatever, the
comment was always made that living in the
woodlands was like being on a constant vacation.
And more than one family expressed that back to our
Philadelphia people. So the statement was made in
our internal group at Betts that Maybe those folks
down in the woodlands are really not working as
hard as they should be. Everybody
always came back. Everybody came back north with a
good suntan. And one hand is always more tan than
the other from the golf gloves.
So the snow diggers... always did envious and then
of course when they used to come down here for we had
quarterly meetings of our executive staff that
came here uh maybe a group of anywhere from six to
ten people including our chief financial officer
our chief legal officer the chairman the
president and several others ahead of our
research department those people came and
reviewed with us our work program for our vets
process company and our vets energy company in
california secondary recovery work and when they
would come they would stay two or three days and
naturally they were very impressed number one
with the woodlands in with the facilities that we
had here the glass menagerie for our big formal
suppers uh places like the feed store or quick
barbecue lunches and heidens for the seafood we
always seem to have so many things around here that
we could take everybody to and i've always made the
statement that the beauty of the woodlands is that
everything is five minutes away you can go to
church you can go to the barbers you can get your
shoes fixed you can get your cleaning post office a
reasonable number of small shops for your wife.
And the vets and the doctors and just everything
that you need is all done. We who lived in
Philadelphia had to travel anywhere from 30 to 45
or 60 minutes to get to the pediatrician, to get to
the hospital that you prefer to have your children
at,
Facilities for, obviously, any kind of a cultural
facility had to be cleared downtown in
Philadelphia to get to the airport within an hour.
And whenever it snowed, then it was twice that. And
our offices were anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes
away, depending upon the weather, so that the
ability to do everything in five minutes It's just
a miracle, as far as I'm concerned, from a work and a
living standpoint. That was my big theme all the
years I've been here, that everything is five
minutes away. That's a good testimonial of what
Mr. Mitchell was trying to do. One last question,
because I haven't had anybody else to ask this, and
you brought it to my mind since you're obviously an
avid golfer. Tell me about golf in the Woodlands.
Are they got four courses now? When we came, the
original course that was wrapped around the
conference center was known as the west course and
the east course was just being completed in 78 and
that's the one that's now the tournament players
course where they had the houston open they had the
houston open for a few years on the west course and
eventually the west was added to in two areas nine
more holes added to the original and first the left
side and then the right side or the north side i
guess you'd call it over in panther creek and that
became the north golf course and then of course the
west new nine holes were over in the grogan's mill
area
grogan's point rather than grogan's mill then the
fourth course is the arnold palmer course which is
way out on the west side in one of the other
villages. See, when we came here, the original
concept was something like six or seven
individual villages, all with separate
shopping, separate living, separate
everything, separate intermediate schools. And
the first one was the only one that existed in 78,
that's Grogan's Mill. Now they have the ones in
Panther Creek and Cochran's Crossing. And I
forget right now. The newer ones over on the other
side. And of course, the lake was built way after.
And the reason we selected our location right
there on the corner of Brogan's Mill and what will
eventually be Lake Woodlands Drive. We will be on
one of the major intersections.
And I'll never forget one of the chairman's
concerns was that we were located too close to the
fire house and the police station. He said you may
eventually end up with so much noise that it may not
be a good spot. But with the way everything is built
in the woodlands, with the
trees and the setback theory of buildings, it's
never been a problem. Surely you can hear it, but
it's never been that much of a problem. So it's not
an annoyance. The insulation of all the trees and
the and so forth really makes it It's a great place.
Well, is there anything I should ask you to have it?
I can't think of anything right now.